---
title: Build a Blog with Antenna App
description: |
  A short turtorial on how to build a blog and microblog with
  Antenna App

author:
  - name: R. S. Doiel
    email: rsdoiel@gmail
keywords:
  - blog
  - Antenna
dateCreated: "2025-08-29"
dateModified: "2025-08-29"
datePublished: "2025-08-29"
---

# Build a Blog with Antenna App

## What is Antenna App?

**antenna** is a command line program you can use as a feed oriented content management system. Historically content management systems were oriented around a unit of content. In the early web that was either a web page or block of HTML that was contained in one or more web pages. **antenna** is a modern static website content management tool. It is oriented to feeds and also can rendered blog posts pages.

**antenna** takes a different approach to many static site rendering or publishing systems. It relies on simple Markdown documents to define a collection, YAML front matter for metadata curation and a few YAML configuration files. The configuration files are generated by **antenna** automatically but they are easy to customized to your needs.

## What is required?

You will need a text editor to create and edit Markdown documents and YAML files. You will need a web browser to review your website. You will need to install the latest version of Antenna App, See <https://github.com/rsdoiel/antennaApp/releases>. Currently Antenna App is experimental, a working proof of concept. It is expected to evolve over time. Getting the latest release is recommended.

The Antenna App is available for Raspberry Pi OS, Linux, macOS and Windows. Find the latest zip file in the releases section of the GitHub repository and download it. You can unzip it and then copy the executable to someplace in your path.  The program runs from a "terminal" and is a command line program. The command line is simple and is based around the idea of an action and parameters needed to complete the action. See the manual page for details, [antenna](antenna.1.md).

Install the latest version of **antenna* executable. Check the installed version

~~~shell
antenna -version
~~~

You should see a version number and release hash.

## How do I set it up?

1. Create a new directory for your project called "blog_demo"
2. Change into it.
3. From the directoray run the Antenna init action
4. Create a collection called "index.md"
5. Add the "index.md" collection to Antenna

Here's the steps in a Windows terminal.

~~~shell
mkdir blog_demo
cd cd blog_demo
antenna init
~~~

You need to define at least one collection. In this case the collection I want you to create is called "index.md". Collections are defined by a simple Markdown document. Top level list anchors are treated as feeds. They are formed like this, `- [FEED_LABEL](FEED_URL "FEED_DESCRIPTION")`. If YAML front matter is included in the document then that data is rendered as Channel metadata when the RSS 2.0 file is generated. In our simple blog model we don't have any feeds to include. Our collection definition can look like this.

~~~markdown
---
title: My Blog
---

# My Blog
~~~

Save the above Markdown as "index.md".  You can put any Markdown in this file. Once you've save "index.md" I want to to "add" it to the Antenna collections using this command.

~~~shell
antenna add index.md
~~~

At this point you can check the directory and you should see several files.

antenna.yaml
: This is the main configuration for the antenna project.

index.yaml
: This is a generator configuration for generating index.html form the index.md collection.

index.db
: This is an SQLite3 database with a channels and items table. It forms the core of the content management tool.

Run `antenna generate`, this will generate two additional files.

index.html
: This is a collection aggregation page, it'll be where your posts show up

index.xml
: This is an RSS 2.0 feed file of your blog site.

## How do I add a Post?

Antenna App supports two flavor of posts. Traditionally blog posts have a landing page
containing the contents of the post. On disk they are organized around a simple nested directory structure where the outer directory name is the year, inside is a two digit month directory and inside that is a two digit day directory. The day directory will hold your blog post.

When making a blog post you must provide some YAML front matter. You need to include the following fields at a minimum.

pubDate
: This is a string holding the date in YYYY-MM-DD format.

postPath
: This is the path where the HTML file will be written, example "posts/2025/08/29/mypost.html".

link
: This is the URL the browser will use to read the post.

After this minimal front matter you can write the post in Markdown. Antenna App will translate that to HTML and include the metadata needed for generating RSS 2.0 feeds for the "index.md" collection.

Here's an example of a "helloworld.md" post documents.

~~~markdown
---
title: Hello World!
link: http://localhost/posts/2025/08/29/helloworld.html
postPath: posts/2025/08/29/helloworld.html
---

# Hello World!

This is my first post.

~~~

Save this file as "helloworld.md". Now let's "post" it using the antenna command and add it to the "index.md" collection.

~~~shell
antenna post index.md helloworld.md
~~~

When you do this you should see a directory create for "posts/2025/08/29" and it'll contain "helloworld.html". If you need to update the post you check repeat the command. The link you include int he front matter is treated as the GUID, the unique identifier for the post.  When you run `antenna generate` the RSS feed and aggregation page will be updated to include your new post.

The post front matter includes support for most the item feeds defined in the RSS 2.0 specification.This is includes fields like title, description, author. 

## How do I add a Micro-blog Post?

Micro blogging has become very populate. Micro blog posts are just short blog posts. Usually they do not have a title. Sometimes you want to write something in the flow and not generated a landing page with the commend by itself. Antenna App supports that feature too. The distinction is that you do not include a title, postPath or link in the front matter. You just include the pubDate string of when you wnat it to show up.

Here's a simple Markdown Microblog post example.

~~~Markdown
---
pubDate: "2025-08-29"
---

Hi There!
~~~

Save this post as "hithere.md". Then "post" it using the antenna.

~~~shell
antenna post hithere.md
~~~

## Generate the site

Blog posts HTML are create when you post the Markdown document. The rest of the site pages are not regenerated yet. To generate the HTML for the aggregaton page (list of blog posts) and the RSS Feed file you use the "generate" action.

~~~shell
antenna generate
~~~

You can then "preview" your website using your web browser at "http://localhost:8000" by run the following command.

~~~shell
antenna preview
~~~

You can press Ctrl-C in the terminal window to end the preview.

## How do I customize the pages?

FIXME: I need to document the YAML and how it works for defining aggregation pages.
